.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 1993-07-21 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1995-04-15 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Added 'fchdir'. Fixed bugs in error section.
.\" Modified 1996-10-21 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1997-08-21 by Joseph S. Myers <jsm28@cam.ac.uk>
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH chdir 2 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
chdir, fchdir \- change working directory
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.P
.BI "int chdir(const char *" path );
.BI "int fchdir(int " fd );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR fchdir ():
.nf
    _XOPEN_SOURCE >= 500
.\"    || _XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
        || /* Since glibc 2.12: */ _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200809L
        || /* glibc up to and including 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR chdir ()
changes the current working directory of the calling process to the
directory specified in
.IR path .
.P
.BR fchdir ()
is identical to
.BR chdir ();
the only difference is that the directory is given as an
open file descriptor.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, zero is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
Depending on the filesystem, other errors can be returned.
The more
general errors for
.BR chdir ()
are listed below:
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied for one of the components of
.IR path .
(See also
.BR path_resolution (7).)
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
points outside your accessible address space.
.TP
.B EIO
An I/O error occurred.
.TP
.B ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in resolving
.IR path .
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I path
is too long.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The directory specified in
.I path
does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component of
.I path
is not a directory.
.P
The general errors for
.BR fchdir ()
are listed below:
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission was denied on the directory open on
.IR fd .
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.I fd
does not refer to a directory.
.SH STANDARDS
POSIX.1-2008.
.SH HISTORY
POSIX.1-2001, SVr4, 4.4BSD.
.SH NOTES
The current working directory is the starting point for interpreting
relative pathnames (those not starting with \[aq]/\[aq]).
.P
A child process created via
.BR fork (2)
inherits its parent's current working directory.
The current working directory is left unchanged by
.BR execve (2).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chroot (2),
.BR getcwd (3),
.BR path_resolution (7)
