.\" Copyright (C) Andreas Gruenbacher, February 2001
.\" Copyright (C) Silicon Graphics Inc, September 2001
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH removexattr 2 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
removexattr, lremovexattr, fremovexattr \- remove an extended attribute
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/xattr.h>
.P
.BI "int removexattr(const char *" path ", const char *" name );
.BI "int lremovexattr(const char *" path ", const char *" name );
.BI "int fremovexattr(int " fd ", const char *" name );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Extended attributes are
.IR name : value
pairs associated with inodes (files, directories, symbolic links, etc.).
They are extensions to the normal attributes which are associated
with all inodes in the system (i.e., the
.BR stat (2)
data).
A complete overview of extended attributes concepts can be found in
.BR xattr (7).
.P
.BR removexattr ()
removes the extended attribute identified by
.I name
and associated with the given
.I path
in the filesystem.
.P
.BR lremovexattr ()
is identical to
.BR removexattr (),
except in the case of a symbolic link, where the extended attribute is
removed from the link itself, not the file that it refers to.
.P
.BR fremovexattr ()
is identical to
.BR removexattr (),
only the extended attribute is removed from the open file referred to by
.I fd
(as returned by
.BR open (2))
in place of
.IR path .
.P
An extended attribute name is a null-terminated string.
The
.I name
includes a namespace prefix; there may be several, disjoint
namespaces associated with an individual inode.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, zero is returned.
On failure, \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B ENODATA
The named attribute does not exist.
.\" .RB ( ENOATTR
.\" is defined to be a synonym for
.\" .BR ENODATA
.\" in
.\" .IR <attr/attributes.h> .)
.TP
.B ENOTSUP
Extended attributes are not supported by the filesystem, or are disabled.
.P
In addition, the errors documented in
.BR stat (2)
can also occur.
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
Linux 2.4,
glibc 2.3.
.\" .SH AUTHORS
.\" Andreas Gruenbacher,
.\" .RI < a.gruenbacher@computer.org >
.\" and the SGI XFS development team,
.\" .RI < linux-xfs@oss.sgi.com >.
.\" Please send any bug reports or comments to these addresses.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR getfattr (1),
.BR setfattr (1),
.BR getxattr (2),
.BR listxattr (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR setxattr (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR symlink (7),
.BR xattr (7)
