.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 2001-03-16 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified 2004-05-27 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH stime 2 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
stime \- set time
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <time.h>
.P
.BI "[[deprecated]] int stime(const time_t *" t );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR stime ():
.nf
    Since glibc 2.19:
        _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    glibc 2.19 and earlier:
        _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR NOTE :
This function is deprecated;
use
.BR clock_settime (2)
instead.
.P
.BR stime ()
sets the system's idea of the time and date.
The time, pointed
to by \fIt\fP, is measured in seconds since the
Epoch, 1970-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 (UTC).
.BR stime ()
may be executed only by the superuser.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, zero is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EFAULT
Error in getting information from user space.
.TP
.B EPERM
The calling process has insufficient privilege.
Under Linux, the
.B CAP_SYS_TIME
privilege is required.
.SH STANDARDS
None.
.SH HISTORY
SVr4.
.P
Starting with glibc 2.31,
this function is no longer available to newly linked applications
and is no longer declared in
.IR <time.h> .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR date (1),
.BR settimeofday (2),
.BR capabilities (7)
