.\" Copyright (c) 2013, Peter Schiffer <pschiffe@redhat.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.TH memusagestat 1 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
memusagestat \- generate graphic from memory profiling data
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR memusagestat " [\fIoption\fR]... \fIdatafile\fR [\fIoutfile\fR]"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B memusagestat
creates a PNG file containing a graphical representation of the
memory profiling data in the file
.IR datafile ;
that file is generated via the
.I \-d
(or
.IR \-\-data )
option of
.BR memusage (1).
.P
The red line in the graph shows the heap usage (allocated memory)
and the green line shows the stack usage.
The x-scale is either the number of memory-handling function calls or
(if the
.I \-t
option is specified)
time.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o\  file \fR,\ \fB\-\-output= file
Name of the output file.
.TP
.BI \-s\  string \fR,\ \fB\-\-string= string
Use
.I string
as the title inside the output graph.
.TP
.B \-t\fR,\ \fB\-\-time
Use time (rather than number of function calls) as the scale for the X axis.
.TP
.B \-T\fR,\ \fB\-\-total
Also draw a graph of total memory consumption.
.TP
.BI \-x\  size \fR,\ \fB\-\-x\-size= size
Make the output graph
.I size
pixels wide.
.TP
.BI \-y\  size \fR,\ \fB\-\-y\-size= size
Make the output graph
.I size
pixels high.
.TP
.B \-?\fR,\ \fB\-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-usage
Print a short usage message and exit.
.TP
.B \-V\fR,\ \fB\-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.SH BUGS
To report bugs, see
.UR http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/bugs.html
.UE
.SH EXAMPLES
See
.BR memusage (1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR memusage (1),
.BR mtrace (1)
