.\" Copyright (C) 2014 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH pldd 1 2024-06-15 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
pldd \- display dynamic shared objects linked into a process
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "pldd " "pid"
.BI pldd " option"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B pldd
command displays a list of the dynamic shared objects (DSOs) that are
linked into the process with the specified process ID (PID).
The list includes the libraries that have been dynamically loaded using
.BR dlopen (3).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
.TQ
.B \-?
Display a help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-usage
Display a short usage message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
.TQ
.B \-V
Display program version information and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
On success,
.B pldd
exits with the status 0.
If the specified process does not exist,
the user does not have permission to access
its dynamic shared object list,
or no command-line arguments are supplied,
.B pldd
exists with a status of 1.
If given an invalid option, it exits with the status 64.
.SH VERSIONS
Some other systems
.\" There are man pages on Solaris and HP-UX.
have a similar command.
.SH STANDARDS
None.
.SH HISTORY
glibc 2.15.
.SH NOTES
The command
.P
.in +4n
.EX
lsof \-p PID
.EE
.in
.P
also shows output that includes the dynamic shared objects
that are linked into a process.
.P
The
.BR gdb (1)
.I "info shared"
command also shows the shared libraries being used by a process,
so that one can obtain similar output to
.B pldd
using a command such as the following
(to monitor the process with the specified
.IR pid ):
.P
.in +4n
.EX
$ \fBgdb \-ex "set confirm off" \-ex "set height 0" \-ex "info shared" \[rs]\fP
        \fB\-ex "quit" \-p $pid | grep \[aq]\[ha]0x.*0x\[aq]\fP
.EE
.in
.SH BUGS
From glibc 2.19 to glibc 2.29,
.B pldd
was broken: it just hung when executed.
.\" glibc commit 1a4c27355e146b6d8cc6487b998462c7fdd1048f
This problem was fixed in glibc 2.30, and the fix has been backported
to earlier glibc versions in some distributions.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
$ \fBecho $$\fP               # Display PID of shell
1143
$ \fBpldd $$\fP               # Display DSOs linked into the shell
1143:   /usr/bin/bash
linux\-vdso.so.1
/lib64/libtinfo.so.5
/lib64/libdl.so.2
/lib64/libc.so.6
/lib64/ld\-linux\-x86\-64.so.2
/lib64/libnss_files.so.2
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ldd (1),
.BR lsof (1),
.BR dlopen (3),
.BR ld.so (8)
