.\" Copyright (C) 1994, 1995, Daniel Quinlan <quinlan@yggdrasil.com>
.\" Copyright (C) 2002-2008, 2017, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright (C) 2023, Alejandro Colomar <alx@kernel.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\"
.TH proc_pid_timers 5 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
/proc/pid/timers \- POSIX timers
.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP
.IR /proc/ pid /timers " (since Linux 3.10)"
.\" commit 5ed67f05f66c41e39880a6d61358438a25f9fee5
.\" commit 48f6a7a511ef8823fdff39afee0320092d43a8a0
A list of the POSIX timers for this process.
Each timer is listed with a line that starts with the string "ID:".
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
ID: 1
signal: 60/00007fff86e452a8
notify: signal/pid.2634
ClockID: 0
ID: 0
signal: 60/00007fff86e452a8
notify: signal/pid.2634
ClockID: 1
.EE
.in
.IP
The lines shown for each timer have the following meanings:
.RS
.TP
.I ID
The ID for this timer.
This is not the same as the timer ID returned by
.BR timer_create (2);
rather, it is the same kernel-internal ID that is available via the
.I si_timerid
field of the
.I siginfo_t
structure (see
.BR sigaction (2)).
.TP
.I signal
This is the signal number that this timer uses to deliver notifications
followed by a slash, and then the
.I sigev_value
value supplied to the signal handler.
Valid only for timers that notify via a signal.
.TP
.I notify
The part before the slash specifies the mechanism
that this timer uses to deliver notifications,
and is one of "thread", "signal", or "none".
Immediately following the slash is either the string "tid" for timers
with
.B SIGEV_THREAD_ID
notification, or "pid" for timers that notify by other mechanisms.
Following the "." is the PID of the process
(or the kernel thread ID of the thread)  that will be delivered
a signal if the timer delivers notifications via a signal.
.TP
.I ClockID
This field identifies the clock that the timer uses for measuring time.
For most clocks, this is a number that matches one of the user-space
.B CLOCK_*
constants exposed via
.IR <time.h> .
.B CLOCK_PROCESS_CPUTIME_ID
timers display with a value of \-6
in this field.
.B CLOCK_THREAD_CPUTIME_ID
timers display with a value of \-2
in this field.
.RE
.IP
This file is available only when the kernel was configured with
.BR CONFIG_CHECKPOINT_RESTORE .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR proc (5)
