.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH repertoiremap 5 2024-06-15 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
repertoiremap \- map symbolic character names to Unicode code points
.SH DESCRIPTION
A repertoire map defines mappings between symbolic character names
(mnemonics) and Unicode code points when compiling a locale with
.BR localedef (1).
Using a repertoire map is optional, it is needed only when symbolic
names are used instead of now preferred Unicode code points.
.SS Syntax
The repertoiremap file starts with a header that may consist of the
following keywords:
.TP
.I comment_char
is followed by a character that will be used as the
comment character for the rest of the file.
It defaults to the number sign (#).
.TP
.I escape_char
is followed by a character that should be used as the escape character
for the rest of the file to mark characters that should be interpreted
in a special way.
It defaults to the backslash (\[rs]).
.P
The mapping section starts with the keyword
.I CHARIDS
in the first column.
.P
The mapping lines have the following form:
.TP
.I <symbolic-name> <code-point> comment
This defines exactly one mapping,
.I comment
being optional.
.P
The mapping section ends with the string
.IR "END CHARIDS" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/i18n/repertoiremaps
Usual default repertoire map path.
.SH STANDARDS
POSIX.2.
.SH NOTES
Repertoire maps are deprecated in favor of Unicode code points.
.SH EXAMPLES
A mnemonic for the Euro sign can be defined as follows:
.P
.nf
<Eu> <U20AC> EURO SIGN
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR locale (1),
.BR localedef (1),
.BR charmap (5),
.BR locale (5)
