'\" t
.\"  Copyright 2002 walter harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-1.0-or-later
.\"  adapted glibc info page
.\"
.\"  polished a little, aeb
.TH addseverity 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
addseverity \- introduce new severity classes
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.P
.B #include <fmtmsg.h>
.P
.BI "int addseverity(int " severity ", const char *" s );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR addseverity ():
.nf
    Since glibc 2.19:
        _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    glibc 2.19 and earlier:
        _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This function allows the introduction of new severity classes
which can be addressed by the
.I severity
argument of the
.BR fmtmsg (3)
function.
By default, that function knows only how to
print messages for severity 0-4 (with strings (none), HALT,
ERROR, WARNING, INFO).
This call attaches the given string
.I s
to the given value
.IR severity .
If
.I s
is NULL, the severity class with the numeric value
.I severity
is removed.
It is not possible to overwrite or remove one of the default
severity classes.
The severity value must be nonnegative.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Upon success, the value
.B MM_OK
is returned.
Upon error, the return value is
.BR MM_NOTOK .
Possible errors include: out of memory, attempt to remove a
nonexistent or default severity class.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR addseverity ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
GNU.
.SH HISTORY
glibc 2.1.
System V.
.SH NOTES
New severity classes can also be added by setting the environment variable
.BR SEV_LEVEL .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fmtmsg (3)
