'\" t
.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-03-29, David Metcalfe
.\" Modified 1993-07-24, Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-08-10, 2003-11-01 Walter Harms, aeb
.\"
.TH div 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
div, ldiv, lldiv, imaxdiv \- compute quotient and remainder of
an integer division
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.P
.BI "div_t div(int " numerator ", int " denominator );
.BI "ldiv_t ldiv(long " numerator ", long " denominator );
.BI "lldiv_t lldiv(long long " numerator ", long long " denominator );
.P
.B #include <inttypes.h>
.P
.BI "imaxdiv_t imaxdiv(intmax_t " numerator ", intmax_t " denominator );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR lldiv ():
.nf
    _ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200112L
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR div ()
function computes the value
\fInumerator\fP/\fIdenominator\fP and
returns the quotient and remainder in a structure
named \fIdiv_t\fP that contains
two integer members (in unspecified order) named \fIquot\fP and \fIrem\fP.
The quotient is rounded toward zero.
The result satisfies \fIquot\fP*\fIdenominator\fP+\fIrem\fP = \fInumerator\fP.
.P
The
.BR ldiv (),
.BR lldiv (),
and
.BR imaxdiv ()
functions do the same,
dividing numbers of the indicated type and
returning the result in a structure
of the indicated name, in all cases with fields \fIquot\fP and \fIrem\fP
of the same type as the function arguments.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The \fIdiv_t\fP (etc.) structure.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR div (),
.BR ldiv (),
.BR lldiv (),
.BR imaxdiv ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
C11, POSIX.1-2008.
.SH HISTORY
POSIX.1-2001, C89, C99, SVr4, 4.3BSD.
.P
.BR lldiv ()
and
.BR imaxdiv ()
were added in C99.
.SH EXAMPLES
After
.P
.in +4n
.EX
div_t q = div(\-5, 3);
.EE
.in
.P
the values \fIq.quot\fP and \fIq.rem\fP are \-1 and \-2, respectively.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR abs (3),
.BR remainder (3)
