'\" t
.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:37:37 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Mon May 27 22:40:48 1996 by Martin Schulze (joey@linux.de)
.\"
.TH fgetpwent 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
fgetpwent \- get password file entry
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <pwd.h>
.P
.BI "struct passwd *fgetpwent(FILE *" stream );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR fgetpwent ():
.nf
    Since glibc 2.19:
        _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    glibc 2.19 and earlier:
        _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR fgetpwent ()
function returns a pointer to a structure containing
the broken out fields of a line in the file \fIstream\fP.
The first time it is called it returns the first entry;
thereafter, it returns successive entries.
The file referred to by
.I stream
must have the same format as
.I /etc/passwd
(see
.BR passwd (5)).
.P
The \fIpasswd\fP structure is defined in \fI<pwd.h>\fP as follows:
.P
.in +4n
.EX
struct passwd {
    char   *pw_name;       /* username */
    char   *pw_passwd;     /* user password */
    uid_t   pw_uid;        /* user ID */
    gid_t   pw_gid;        /* group ID */
    char   *pw_gecos;      /* real name */
    char   *pw_dir;        /* home directory */
    char   *pw_shell;      /* shell program */
};
.EE
.in
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR fgetpwent ()
function returns a pointer to a
.I passwd
structure, or NULL if
there are no more entries or an error occurs.
In the event of an error,
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient memory to allocate
.I passwd
structure.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/passwd
password database file
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR fgetpwent ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Unsafe race:fgetpwent
.TE
.\" FIXME: The marking is different from that in the glibc manual,
.\" which has:
.\"
.\"    fgetpwent: MT-Unsafe race:fpwent
.\"
.\" We think race:fpwent in glibc maybe hard for users to understand,
.\" and have sent a patch to the GNU libc community for changing it to
.\" race:fgetpwent, however, something about the copyright impeded the
.\" progress.
.SH STANDARDS
None.
.SH HISTORY
SVr4.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR endpwent (3),
.BR fgetpwent_r (3),
.BR fopen (3),
.BR getpw (3),
.BR getpwent (3),
.BR getpwnam (3),
.BR getpwuid (3),
.BR putpwent (3),
.BR setpwent (3),
.BR passwd (5)
