'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH getutmp 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
getutmp, getutmpx \- copy utmp structure to utmpx, and vice versa
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "             /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.B #include <utmpx.h>
.P
.BI "void getutmp(const struct utmpx *" ux ", struct utmp *" u );
.BI "void getutmpx(const struct utmp *" u ", struct utmpx *" ux );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR getutmp ()
function copies the fields of the
.I utmpx
structure pointed to by
.I ux
to the corresponding fields of the
.I utmp
structure pointed to by
.IR u .
The
.BR getutmpx ()
function performs the converse operation.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These functions do not return a value.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR getutmp (),
.BR getutmpx ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
None.
.SH HISTORY
glibc 2.1.1.
Solaris, NetBSD.
.SH NOTES
These functions exist primarily for compatibility with other
systems where the
.I utmp
and
.I utmpx
structures contain different fields,
or the size of corresponding fields differs.
.\" e.g., on Solaris, the utmpx structure is rather larger than utmp.
On Linux, the two structures contain the same fields,
and the fields have the same sizes.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR utmpdump (1),
.BR getutent (3),
.BR utmp (5)
