'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.TH iswspace 3 2024-06-15 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
iswspace \- test for whitespace wide character
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.P
.BI "int iswspace(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR iswspace ()
function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.BR isspace (3)
function.
It tests whether
.I wc
is a wide character
belonging to the wide-character class "space".
.P
The wide-character class "space" is disjoint from the wide-character class
"graph" and therefore also disjoint from its subclasses "alnum", "alpha",
"upper", "lower", "digit", "xdigit", "punct".
.\" Note: UNIX98 (susv2/xbd/locale.html) says that "space" and "graph" may
.\" have characters in common, except U+0020. But C99 (ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\" section 7.25.2.1.10) says that "space" and "graph" are disjoint.
.P
The wide-character class "space" contains the wide-character class "blank".
.P
The wide-character class "space"
always contains at least the space character
and the control characters
\[aq]\[rs]f\[aq], \[aq]\[rs]n\[aq], \[aq]\[rs]r\[aq], \[aq]\[rs]t\[aq], and \[aq]\[rs]v\[aq].
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR iswspace ()
function returns nonzero if
.I wc
is a wide character
belonging to the wide-character class "space".
Otherwise, it returns zero.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR iswspace ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe locale
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
C11, POSIX.1-2008.
.SH HISTORY
POSIX.1-2001, C99.
.SH NOTES
The behavior of
.BR iswspace ()
depends on the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the
current locale.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR isspace (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
