'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH pthread_attr_setstackaddr 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
pthread_attr_setstackaddr, pthread_attr_getstackaddr \-
set/get stack address attribute in thread attributes object
.SH LIBRARY
POSIX threads library
.RI ( libpthread ", " \-lpthread )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <pthread.h>
.P
.B [[deprecated]]
.BI "int pthread_attr_setstackaddr(pthread_attr_t *" attr \
", void *" stackaddr );
.B [[deprecated]]
.BI "int pthread_attr_getstackaddr(const pthread_attr_t *restrict " attr ,
.BI "                              void **restrict " stackaddr );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions are obsolete:
.B do not use them.
Use
.BR pthread_attr_setstack (3)
and
.BR pthread_attr_getstack (3)
instead.
.P
The
.BR pthread_attr_setstackaddr ()
function sets the stack address attribute of the
thread attributes object referred to by
.I attr
to the value specified in
.IR stackaddr .
This attribute specifies the location of the stack that should
be used by a thread that is created using the thread attributes object
.IR attr .
.P
.I stackaddr
should point to a buffer of at least
.B PTHREAD_STACK_MIN
bytes that was allocated by the caller.
The pages of the allocated buffer should be both readable and writable.
.P
The
.BR pthread_attr_getstackaddr ()
function returns the stack address attribute of the
thread attributes object referred to by
.I attr
in the buffer pointed to by
.IR stackaddr .
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, these functions return 0;
on error, they return a nonzero error number.
.SH ERRORS
No errors are defined
(but applications should nevertheless
handle a possible error return).
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR pthread_attr_setstackaddr (),
.BR pthread_attr_getstackaddr ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
None.
.SH HISTORY
glibc 2.1.
Marked obsolete in POSIX.1-2001.
Removed in POSIX.1-2008.
.SH NOTES
.I Do not use these functions!
They cannot be portably used, since they provide no way of specifying
the direction of growth or the range of the stack.
For example, on architectures with a stack that grows downward,
.I stackaddr
specifies the next address past the
.I highest
address of the allocated stack area.
However, on architectures with a stack that grows upward,
.I stackaddr
specifies the
.I lowest
address in the allocated stack area.
By contrast, the
.I stackaddr
used by
.BR pthread_attr_setstack (3)
and
.BR pthread_attr_getstack (3),
is always a pointer to the lowest address in the allocated stack area
(and the
.I stacksize
argument specifies the range of the stack).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pthread_attr_init (3),
.BR pthread_attr_setstack (3),
.BR pthread_attr_setstacksize (3),
.BR pthread_create (3),
.BR pthreads (7)
