.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH pthread_mutexattr_init 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
pthread_mutexattr_init, pthread_mutexattr_destroy \- initialize and
destroy a mutex attributes object
.SH LIBRARY
POSIX threads library
.RI ( libpthread ", " \-lpthread )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <pthread.h>
.P
.BI "int pthread_mutexattr_init(pthread_mutexattr_t *" attr ");"
.BI "int pthread_mutexattr_destroy(pthread_mutexattr_t *" attr ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR pthread_mutexattr_init ()
function initializes the mutex attributes object pointed to by
.I attr
with default values for all attributes defined by the implementation.
.P
The results of initializing an already initialized mutex attributes
object are undefined.
.P
The
.BR pthread_mutexattr_destroy ()
function destroys a mutex attribute object (making it uninitialized).
Once a mutex attributes object has been destroyed, it can be reinitialized with
.BR pthread_mutexattr_init ().
.P
The results of destroying an uninitialized mutex attributes
object are undefined.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, these functions return 0.
On error, they return a positive error number.
.SH STANDARDS
POSIX.1-2008.
.SH HISTORY
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH NOTES
Subsequent changes to a mutex attributes object do not affect mutex that
have already been initialized using that object.
.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
.nh
.BR pthread_mutex_init (3),
.BR pthread_mutexattr_getpshared (3),
.BR pthread_mutexattr_getrobust (3),
.BR pthreads (7)
