'\" t
.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 1996-06-08 by aeb
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.TH sinh 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
sinh, sinhf, sinhl \- hyperbolic sine function
.SH LIBRARY
Math library
.RI ( libm ", " \-lm )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.P
.BI "double sinh(double " x );
.BI "float sinhf(float " x );
.BI "long double sinhl(long double " x );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR sinhf (),
.BR sinhl ():
.nf
    _ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200112L
        || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
        || /* glibc <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions return the hyperbolic sine of
.IR x ,
which
is defined mathematically as:
.P
.nf
    sinh(x) = (exp(x) \- exp(\-x)) / 2
.fi
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, these functions return the hyperbolic sine of
.IR x .
.P
If
.I x
is a NaN, a NaN is returned.
.P
If
.I x
is +0 (\-0), +0 (\-0) is returned.
.P
If
.I x
is positive infinity (negative infinity),
positive infinity (negative infinity) is returned.
.P
If the result overflows,
a range error occurs,
and the functions return
.BR HUGE_VAL ,
.BR HUGE_VALF ,
or
.BR HUGE_VALL ,
respectively, with the same sign as
.IR x .
.\"
.\" POSIX.1-2001 documents an optional range error (underflow)
.\" for subnormal x;
.\" glibc 2.8 does not do this.
.SH ERRORS
See
.BR math_error (7)
for information on how to determine whether an error has occurred
when calling these functions.
.P
The following errors can occur:
.TP
Range error: result overflow
.I errno
is set to
.BR ERANGE .
An overflow floating-point exception
.RB ( FE_OVERFLOW )
is raised.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR sinh (),
.BR sinhf (),
.BR sinhl ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
C11, POSIX.1-2008.
.SH HISTORY
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.P
The variant returning
.I double
also conforms to
SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR acosh (3),
.BR asinh (3),
.BR atanh (3),
.BR cosh (3),
.BR csinh (3),
.BR tanh (3)
