'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.TH wcscasecmp 3 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
wcscasecmp \- compare two wide-character strings, ignoring case
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ", " \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.P
.BI "int wcscasecmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR wcscasecmp ():
.nf
    Since glibc 2.10:
        _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200809L
    Before glibc 2.10:
        _GNU_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR wcscasecmp ()
function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.BR strcasecmp (3)
function.
It compares the wide-character string pointed to
by
.I s1
and the wide-character string pointed to by
.IR s2 ,
ignoring
case differences
.RB ( towupper (3),
.BR towlower (3)).
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR wcscasecmp ()
function returns zero if the wide-character strings at
.I s1
and
.I s2
are equal except for case distinctions.
It returns a
positive integer if
.I s1
is greater than
.IR s2 ,
ignoring case.
It
returns a negative integer if
.I s1
is smaller
than
.IR s2 ,
ignoring case.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR wcscasecmp ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe locale
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
POSIX.1-2008.
.SH HISTORY
glibc 2.1.
.SH NOTES
The behavior of
.BR wcscasecmp ()
depends on the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the
current locale.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR strcasecmp (3),
.BR wcscmp (3)
