'\" t
.\" Copyright (C) 2019-2023, Microchip Technology Inc. and its subsidiaries
.\" Copyright (C) 2016-2018, Microsemi Corporation
.\" Copyright (C) 2016, PMC-Sierra, Inc.
.\" Written by Kevin Barnett <kevin.barnett@microchip.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-only
.TH smartpqi 4 2024-05-02 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
smartpqi \- Microchip Smart Storage SCSI driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY "modprobe smartpqi"
.RB [ disable_device_id_wildcards= { 0 | 1 }]
.RB [ disable_heartbeat= { 0 | 1 }]
.RB [ disable_ctrl_shutdown= { 0 | 1 }]
.RB [ lockup_action= { none | reboot | panic }]
.RB [ expose_ld_first= { 0 | 1 }]
.RB [ hide_vsep= { 0 | 1 }]
.RB [ disable_managed_interrupts= { 0 | 1 }]
.RB [ ctrl_ready_timeout= { 0 |[ 30 , 1800 ]}]
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartpqi
is a SCSI driver for Microchip Smart Storage controllers.
.SS Supported \f[BI]ioctl\fP\/() operations
For compatibility with applications written for the
.BR cciss (4)
and
.BR hpsa (4)
drivers, many, but not all of the
.BR ioctl (2)
operations supported by the
.B hpsa
driver are also supported by the
.B smartpqi
driver.
The data structures used by these operations
are described in the Linux kernel source file
.IR include/linux/cciss_ioctl.h .
.TP
.B CCISS_DEREGDISK
.TQ
.B CCISS_REGNEWDISK
.TQ
.B CCISS_REGNEWD
These operations
all do exactly the same thing, which is to cause the driver to re-scan
for new devices.
This does exactly the same thing as writing to the
.BR smartpqi -specific
host
.I rescan
attribute.
.TP
.B CCISS_GETPCIINFO
This operation returns the PCI domain, bus,
device, and function and "board ID" (PCI subsystem ID).
.TP
.B CCISS_GETDRIVVER
This operation returns the driver version in four bytes, encoded as:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
(major_version << 28) | (minor_version << 24) |
        (release << 16) | revision
.EE
.in
.TP
.B CCISS_PASSTHRU
Allows BMIC and CISS commands to be passed through to the controller.
.SS Boot options
.TP
.BR disable_device_id_wildcards= { 0 | 1 }
Disables support for device ID wildcards.
The default value is 0 (wildcards are enabled).
.TP
.BR disable_heartbeat= { 0 | 1 }
Disables support for the controller's heartbeat check.
This parameter is used for debugging purposes.
The default value is 0 (the controller's heartbeat check is enabled).
.TP
.BR disable_ctrl_shutdown= { 0 | 1 }
Disables support for shutting down the controller in the
event of a controller lockup.
The default value is 0 (controller will be shut down).
.TP
.BR lockup_action= { none | reboot | panic }
Specifies the action the driver takes when a controller
lockup is detected.
The default action is
.BR none .
.TS
l l
---
l l.
parameter	action
\fBnone\fP	take controller offline only
\fBreboot\fP	reboot the system
\fBpanic\fP	panic the system
.TE
.TP
.BR expose_ld_first= { 0 | 1 }
This option exposes logical devices to the OS before physical devices.
The default value is 0 (physical devices exposed first).
.TP
.BR hide_vsep= { 0 | 1 }
This option disables exposure of the virtual SEP to the OS.
The default value is 0 (virtual SEP is exposed).
.TP
.BR disable_managed_interrupts= { 0 | 1 }
Disables driver utilization of Linux kernel managed interrupts for controllers.
The managed interrupts feature automatically distributes interrupts
to all available CPUs and assigns SMP affinity.
The default value is 0 (managed interrupts enabled).
.TP
.BR ctrl_ready_timeout= { 0 |[ 30 , 1800 ]}
This option specifies the timeout in seconds for the driver to wait
for the controller to be ready.
The valid range is 0 or
.RB [ 30 ", " 1800 ].
The default value is 0,
which causes the driver to use a timeout of 180 seconds.
.SH FILES
.SS Device nodes
Disk drives are accessed via the SCSI disk driver
.RI ( sd ),
tape drives via the SCSI tape driver
.RI ( st ),
and the RAID controller via the SCSI generic driver
.RI ( sg ),
with device nodes named
.IR /dev/sd *,
.IR /dev/st *,
and
.IR /dev/sg *,
respectively.
.SS SmartPQI-specific host attribute files in \f[BI]/sys\fP
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /rescan
The host
.I rescan
attribute is a write-only attribute.
Writing to this attribute will cause the driver to scan for new,
changed, or removed devices (e.g., hot-plugged tape drives, or newly
configured or deleted logical volumes) and notify the SCSI mid-layer of
any changes detected.
Usually this action is triggered automatically by configuration
changes, so the user should not normally have to write to this file.
Doing so may be useful when hot-plugging devices such as tape drives or
entire storage boxes containing pre-configured logical volumes.
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /lockup_action
The host
.I lockup_action
attribute is a read/write attribute.
This attribute will cause the driver to perform a specific action in the
unlikely event that a controller lockup has been detected.
See
.B OPTIONS
above
for an explanation of the
.I lockup_action
values.
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /driver_version
The
.I driver_version
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the smartpqi driver version.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/driver_version
1.1.2\-126
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /firmware_version
The
.I firmware_version
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the controller firmware version.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/firmware_version
1.29\-112
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /model
The
.I model
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the product identification string of the controller.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/model
1100\-16i
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /serial_number
The
.I serial_number
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the unique identification number of the controller.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/serial_number
6A316373777
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /vendor
The
.I vendor
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the vendor identification string of the controller.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/vendor
Adaptec
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /enable_stream_detection
The
.I enable_stream_detection
attribute is read-write.
This attribute enables/disables stream detection in the driver.
Enabling stream detection can improve sequential write performance
for ioaccel-enabled volumes.
See the
.B ssd_smart_path_enabled
disk attribute section for details on ioaccel-enabled volumes.
The default value is 1 (stream detection enabled).
.IP
Enable example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B echo 1 > /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/enable_stream_detection
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /enable_r5_writes
The
.I enable_r5_writes
attribute is read-write.
This attribute enables/disables RAID 5 write operations
for ioaccel-enabled volumes.
Enabling can improve sequential write performance.
See the
.B ssd_smart_path_enabled
disk attribute section for details on ioaccel-enabled volumes.
The default value is 1 (RAID 5 writes enabled).
.IP
Enable example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B echo 1 > /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/enable_r5_writes
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_host/host * /enable_r6_writes
The
.I enable_r6_writes
attribute is read-write.
This attribute enables/disables RAID 6 write operations
for ioaccel-enabled volumes.
Enabling can improve sequential write performance.
See the
.B ssd_smart_path_enabled
disk attribute section for details on ioaccel-enabled volumes.
The default value is 1 (RAID 6 writes enabled).
.IP
Enable example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B echo 1 > /sys/class/scsi_host/host1/enable_r6_writes
.EE
.in
.SS SmartPQI-specific disk attribute files in \f[BI]/sys\fP
In the file specifications below,
.I c
stands for the number of the appropriate SCSI controller,
.I b
is the bus number,
.I t
the target number, and
.I l
is the logical unit number (LUN).
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/raid_level
The
.I raid_level
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the RAID level of the logical volume.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/4:0:0:0/device/raid_level
RAID 0
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/sas_address
The
.I sas_address
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the SAS address of the device.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/1:0:3:0/device/sas_address
0x5001173d028543a2
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/ssd_smart_path_enabled
The
.I ssd_smart_path_enabled
attribute is read-only.
This attribute is for ioaccel-enabled volumes.
(Ioaccel is an alternative driver submission path that allows the
driver to send I/O requests directly to backend SCSI devices,
bypassing the controller firmware.
This results in an increase in performance.
This method is used for HBA disks and for logical volumes comprised of SSDs.)
Contains 1 if ioaccel is enabled for the volume and 0 otherwise.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/1:0:3:0/device/ssd_smart_path_enabled
0
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/lunid
The
.I lunid
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the SCSI LUN ID for the device.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/13:1:0:3/device/lunid
0x0300004000000000
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/unique_id
The
.I unique_id
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains a 16-byte ID
that uniquely identifies the device within the controller.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/13:1:0:3/device/unique_id
600508B1001C6D4723A8E98D704FDB94
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/path_info
The
.I path_info
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the
.IR c : b : t : l
of the device
along with the device type
and whether the device is Active or Inactive.
If the device is an HBA device,
.I path_info
will also display the PORT, BOX, and BAY the device is plugged into.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/13:1:0:3/device/path_info
[13:1:0:3]    Direct-Access     Active
\&
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/12:0:9:0/device/path_info
[12:0:9:0]  Direct-Access   PORT: C1 BOX: 1 BAY: 14 Inactive
[12:0:9:0]  Direct-Access   PORT: C0 BOX: 1 BAY: 14 Active
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/raid_bypass_cnt
The
.I raid_bypass_cnt
attribute is read-only.
This attribute contains the number of I/O requests
that have gone through the ioaccel path
for ioaccel-enabled volumes.
See the
.B ssd_smart_path_enabled
disk attribute section for details on ioaccel-enabled volumes.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B cat /sys/class/scsi_disk/13:1:0:3/device/raid_bypass_cnt
0x300
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/class/scsi_disk/ c : b : t : l /device/sas_ncq_prio_enable
The
.I sas_ncq_prio_enable
attribute is read/write.
This attribute enables SATA NCQ priority support.
This attribute works only when device has NCQ support
and controller firmware can handle IO with NCQ priority attribute.
.IP
For example:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \c
.B echo 1 > /sys/class/scsi_disk/13:1:0:3/device/sas_ncq_prio_enable
.EE
.in
.SH VERSIONS
The
.B smartpqi
driver was added in Linux 4.9.
.SH NOTES
.SS Configuration
To configure a Microchip Smart Storage controller,
refer to the User Guide for the controller,
which can be found by searching for the specific controller at
.UR https://www.microchip.com/design-centers/storage
.UE .
.SH HISTORY
.I /sys/class/scsi_host/host*/version
was replaced by two sysfs entries:
.IP
.I /sys/class/scsi_host/host*/driver_version
.IP
.I /sys/class/scsi_host/host*/firmware_version
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cciss (4),
.BR hpsa (4),
.BR sd (4),
.BR st (4),
.BR sg (4)
.P
.I Documentation/ABI/testing/sysfs\-bus\-pci\-devices\-cciss
in the Linux kernel source tree.
